Participation: do the readings in advance easy 10 points; ask questions, don’t use the laptop, go to office hours, get stuff in on time.
Analysis is due on Blackboard on November 12th at 1:30 PM  %25 of grade
Understanding for negotiation Quizzes and terminology : DO THE READING FOR PRACTICE
$30 is going to student account
Q) The slides are going to be a bit of an issue: how do they fit in the larger picture?


NEGOTIATION:
International Focus

88-419 Section B
94-817 Section B
5421Wean Hall
Fall 2014

	Mondays and Wednesdays, 1:30-2:50

Professor Linda Babcock
Porter Hall, 319B, 2688789
Email: LB2K@andrew.cmu.edu
Office hours: Mondays 4:00-5:00, or by appointment

A.	COURSE OBJECTIVES
	Negotiation is the process by which two or more parties with interdependent interests secure agreements.  This course will cover the basic principles of negotiation and pay specific attention to the complexities that arise when negotiations take place across national boundaries.  These complexities involve cross-cultural differences in beliefs and values, historical animosities, and linkages to negotiations with other countries, in addition to the standard complexities that arise in domestic negotiations.  The objectives of this course are the following: 
introduce students to the analytical framework and concepts necessary to understand the dynamics of negotiation 
learn to balance the implicit tradeoffs of competition and cooperation inherent in most negotiations
introduce students to a variety of negotiation strategies
understand the factors that impede successful negotiations 
learn about cultural differences in beliefs and values and how they influence the negotiation process
understand the factors that lead to the escalation of conflict and how to minimize them
understand how to deal with the complexity associated with multiple parties, difficult issues, and the historical context
 
B. 	READINGS AND LECTURE NOTES
	The texts for the course are Malhotra and Bazerman, Negotiation Genius; Watkins and Rosegrant, Breakthrough International Negotiations; and Noesner, Stalling for Time. The first two books are at the bookstore and the last book is available on Amazon.com (you can get it used for about $5.00 total or you can borrow a copy from me; copies are in the black bins in Hamburg Hall suite 2109).  Additional readings will be posted to blackboard. The course outline below describes the reading assignments that are due for each class.  Please come to class prepared!  Negotiation cases will be handed out during the course of the semester.  A course fee of approximately $30.00 will be charged to your Carnegie Mellon account to pay for the negotiation cases.  Lecture notes for class will be posted on blackboard under “course documents”. 

C.	COURSE REQUIREMENTS
	The final grade will be calculated out of 100 total points
	Negotiation Exercises						10 points
	Preparation Plan #1			 			10 points
	Preparation Plan #2						10 points
	Preparation Worksheet					  5 points
	Analysis of Negotiation in the News				25 points
	Quizzes							30 points
	Class Participation						10 points
	Extra Credit							  3 points


1. 	NEGOTIATION EXERCISES
	In this course, you will be asked to participate in negotiation exercises to help you develop negotiation skills experientially.  It is crucial for your learning that you spend adequate time preparing for the negotiations.   Negotiation roles will be passed out in class but extra copies of the cases will also be available in the black bins in Hamburg Hall (HbH) suite 2109.
	In the exercises, you will receive general instructions for the exercises as well as confidential instructions.  Never show the confidential instructions to others.  Do not meet with others in preparing for the negotiation exercises.   
	We will conduct 5 in-class negotiation exercises (the Guatemala negotiation counts as two).  If you participate in 4 or 5 of the in-class negotiation exercises you will receive the full 10 points to contribute to your final grade.  If you participate in 3 exercises you will receive 5 points.  If you participate in only 1 or 2 exercises you will receive 0 points.  Please check blackboard periodically to make sure that your participation in the exercises is correctly accounted for.
2.	PREPARATION PLANS
You are required to submit two preparation plans to be uploaded to blackboard on September 10th (for Mapletech/Yazawa) and October 15th (for Panda) by 1:30 PM.   Plans should be no longer than 3 single-spaced pages for the Mapletech/Yazawa plan and 4 single-spaced pages for the Panda plan.  Your plans should be based on two sections:
This section contains all the analysis you need to conduct before you even decide on a negotiation strategy or approach.  You should include the features of the negotiation environment and the negotiation parameters (BATNAs, RVs, AVs, interests, priorities over the issues if applicable) for all parties.  See August 25th lecture notes. This section should be in bullet points.
Describe your negotiation approach and strategy (for example, how are you going to open the negotiation? What kinds of negotiation tactics will you be using?)  For the Panda plan, please also address the questions at the end of the case.
In both sections, please detail how information from the readings guided you in the analysis.  All plans must be submitted to Blackboard in advance of class.  Late plans will not be accepted.

3.	ANALYSIS OF NEGOTIATION IN THE NEWS

Analyze a negotiation taking place currently and being reported in the news and that involves negotiations across national boundaries.  The first section of the paper should be a complete analysis (in bullet points) of the features of the negotiation environment (see August 25th lecture notes).  The second section should describe all parties’ negotiation parameters (BATNAs, RVs, AVs, ZOPA).  The third section should discuss the types of strategies that each side is using, how the parties might negotiate more effectively, how you expect the negotiation to be resolved and any other type of analysis you deem relevant.  Assignment should be no longer than 4 pages single-spaced.  Analysis is due on Blackboard on November 12th at 1:30 PM



4.	PREPARATION WORKSHEET

	To get ready for the Guatemala negotiation, I will post to blackboard a preparation worksheet regarding your role, your beliefs about the other participants in the negotiation, and your strategy for the negotiation.  This is due at the beginning of class on November 19th (please upload to blackboard).

5.	QUIZZES

	There will be two in-class quizzes (October 8th and December 3rd).  

6.   	CLASS PARTICIPATION

	When you actively participate in the class discussion of the negotiation exercises and the historical cases, you will develop a deeper understanding of the course concepts and you will become more effective in concisely articulating your point of view.  To encourage you to participate, you can earn up to 10 points of class participation that will count towards your final grade.  

7.	EXTRA CREDIT

	The content for this class relies heavily on experimental negotiation research.  To “give back” to the research community you can participate in experimental research at Carnegie Mellon for three hours over the course of the semester to earn 3 extra credit points to count towards your final grade.  Details about how to sign up will be provided during the second week of classes.

D.	LAPTOP POLICY

	I don’t allow the use of laptops, iPads, PDAs, iPods, or phones during class.  If you would like an exemption to this rule, please see me to discuss.


E.  	CHEATING AND PLAGARISM

In case of cheating or plagiarism the instructor will make full use of University and School policies and regulations. 


















	
F.	COURSE OUTLINE
8/25	Introduction to the course
	Class activity: Introduction (download Introduction lecture notes and syllabus)
8/27	Complex Negotiations
Class activity: watch film, Final Offer 
	Readings due today: Raiffa, pages 7-25
9/3	Complex Negotiations
Class activity: Final Offer discussion
Readings due today: Negotiation Genius (NG) Introduction
	Handout: Mapletech/Yazawa case (also in HbH 2109 bins)
9/8	Distributive Negotiations
Class activity: lecture on distributive negotiations (download Distributive Negotiation lecture notes)
Readings due today: NG chapter 1 and Raiffa pages 35-43
9/10	Distributive Negotiations
Class activity: negotiate Mapletech/Yazawa and discuss
Readings due today: Shell pages 3-21 and appendix A
Assignments due today: Be ready to negotiate Mapletech/Yazawa and submit preparation plan for Mapletech/Yazawa (upload to blackboard)
9/15	Distributive Negotiations
	Class activity: discuss Malta case (download Malta lecture notes)
	Readings due today: Wriggins, Up for Auction: Malta Bargains with Great Britain
9/17	Difficult Negotiations
	Class activity: discuss Cuban Missile Crisis (download Cuba lecture notes)
Readings due today: read through the entire timeline of the crisis at http://www.cubanmissilecrisis.org/background/timeline/, follow the arrows to read all the history.  Watch the following short videos at http://www.cubanmissilecrisis.org/for-educators/video-resources/: “Foreign Affairs Focus On Nuclear Lessons: The Cuban Missile Crisis With Graham Allison,” “JFK50 – His Finest Hour,” and “Sergei Khrushchev on the Cuban Missile Crisis”
Handouts: case for Texoil (also in HbH 2109 bins)
9/22	Difficult Negotiations
Class activity: negotiate Texoil
Readings due today: Shell pages 22-38
	Assignments due today: Be ready to negotiate Texoil 
9/24	Difficult Negotiations
Class activity: discuss Texoil
Readings due today: Shell pages 76-88
9/29	Preparing and Assessing Barriers
Class activity: assessing the bargaining environment in North Korea (download North Korea lecture notes)
Readings due today: Watkins and Rosegrant pages xvii-xxii and 1-55
10/1	Integrative Negotiations
Class activity: lecture on integrative negotiations (download Integrative Negotiation lecture notes)
Readings due today: NG chapters 2 and 3 and Raiffa pages 131-147
Handouts: case for NBT vs. AGMA (also in HbH 2109 bins)
10/6	Integrative Negotiations
Class activity: negotiate NBT vs. AGMA and discuss
Readings due today: Fisher and Ury, pages 3-14 and pages 40-80 
Assignments due today: Be ready to negotiate NBT vs. AGMA
10/8	Quiz
Class activity: quiz #1
	Handouts: Stuart Eizenstat case, Panda Part A
10/13	Difficult Negotiations
Class activity: discuss Stuart Eizenstat, Negotiating the final accounts of World War II (download Eizenstat lecture notes)
	Assignments due today: Read Stuart Eizenstat case and be ready to discuss
10/15	Negotiating with Low Power
	Class activity: discuss Panda Part A
	Readings due today: Panda Part A; Lax and Sebenius 7-34
	Assignments due today: Preparation plan for Panda Part A
	Handouts: Panda Parts B and C
10/20	3-D Negotiations
	Class activity: discuss Panda Parts B & C
	Readings due today: Lax and Sebenius 53-68; Panda Parts B and C
10/22	Cognitive Biases and Ethical Issues
Class activity: discuss how biases and ethical issues affect negotiation (download Biases lecture notes)
Readings due today: NG chapters 4-6; Shell pages 201-234; Bazerman and Tenbrunsel, chapter 1; Read Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
10/27	Stalling for Time
Class activity: discuss strategic delays in negotiations (download Stalling for Time lecture notes)
	Readings due today:  Noesner, preface and pages 1-93 (buy book or borrow from me).
Handouts: case for Beagle Channel Negotiations (parts A, B, and C) (also in HbH 2109 bins)
10/29	Stalling for Time
	Class activity: discuss Beagle Channel Negotiations (download Beagle lecture notes)
	Readings due today: Beagle Channel negotiations parts A, B, and C
11/3	Ripeness and Intermediaries in International Negotiations
	Class activity: discuss Oslo negotiation (download Oslo lecture notes)
	Readings due today: Watkins and Rosegrant pages xviii-xxii, 133-177
11/5	Intermediaries	
Class activity: discuss Carter’s intervention in the North Korea talks (download Carter lecture notes)
	Readings due today: Watkins and Rosegrant pages 56-108
11/10	Building Coalitions
	Class activity: discuss Gulf War coalition case (download Gulf War lecture notes)
	Readings due today: Watkins and Rosegrant pages 178-227; Thompson pages 218-257
Handouts: background and confidential information for Guatemala negotiation (also in HbH 2109 bins)
11/12	Multi-party Negotiations
Class activity: meet in within-role groups to prepare for Guatemala negotiation and work on preparation worksheet (download Preparation Worksheet)
Readings due today: Read “Historical Background and General Instructions” and “Confidential Instructions” for your role for Guatemala negotiation
Assignments due today: be ready to discuss your role in groups in preparation for the Guatemala negotiation
Assignments due today: Negotiation in the News Analysis (upload to Blackboard)
11/17	Multi-party Negotiations
	Class activity: Begin Guatemala negotiation
	Readings due today: Ury pages 31-104, Lewicki, Saunders, and Minton pages 167-178
Assignments due today: preparation worksheet for Guatemala negotiation (upload to blackboard)
11/19	Multi-Party Negotiations
Class activity: Finish up Guatemala negotiation
Readings due today: Lewicki, Barry, and Saunders pages 304-310; Lax and Sebenius pages 99-116
11/24	No Class
11/26	No Class, Thanksgiving Holiday
12/1	Multi-Party Negotiations
	Class activity: discuss Guatemala case
Readings due today: Lytle, Brett, and Shapiro article
12/3	Quiz
Class activity: Quiz #2